in softmax CE loss, what is
text
delta3[range(len(X)), y] -= 1

Answer
A snippet of code from a Softmax Cross-Entropy loss implementation!
In this specific line of code, delta3 is likely the derivative of the loss with respect to the output of the softmax function.
Here's what's happening:
range(len(X)): This generates an array of indices from 0 to len(X) - 1, where X is the input data.
y: This is the true label (or target) for each sample in X.
delta3[range(len(X)), y]: This selects the elements in delta3 at the indices specified by range(len(X)) and the corresponding labels y. In other words, it selects the elements in delta3 that correspond to the true labels.
-=: This subtracts 1 from the selected elements.
The purpose of this line is to compute the derivative of the Cross-Entropy loss with respect to the output of the softmax function. Specifically, it's implementing the following formula:
∂L/∂z = p - y
where:
L is the Cross-Entropy loss
z is the output of the softmax function
p is the predicted probability distribution
y is the true label (one-hot encoded)
By subtracting 1 from the elements in delta3 that correspond to the true labels, we're effectively computing the error gradient of the Cross-Entropy loss with respect to the output of the softmax function.
This is a key step in backpropagation, as it allows us to propagate the error gradients backwards through the network and update the model's weights accordingly.

Ask
first, how is CE loss itself calulated with softmax output? second, why is the CE loss derivative being ∂L/∂z = p - y


Answer
I'd be happy to explain both concepts in detail.
1. Calculating Cross-Entropy (CE) Loss with Softmax Output
The Cross-Entropy loss is a measure of the difference between the predicted probability distribution and the true label. Given a softmax output p and a true label y, the CE loss is calculated as:
L = -∑(y * log(p))
where:
L is the Cross-Entropy loss
y is the true label (one-hot encoded)
p is the predicted probability distribution (softmax output)
log is the natural logarithm
In the context of multi-class classification, the true label y is typically one-hot encoded, meaning it's a vector with all zeros except for a single 1 at the index corresponding to the correct class.
For example, if we have three classes and the true label is class 2, the one-hot encoded label would be: [0, 1, 0].
The softmax output p is a probability distribution over all classes, where each element represents the predicted probability of the corresponding class.
To calculate the CE loss, we multiply the true label y element-wise with the logarithm of the predicted probabilities log(p), and then sum up the results. The negative sign is used to convert the loss into a minimization problem.
2. Derivative of Cross-Entropy Loss (∂L/∂z = p - y)
Now, let's derive the derivative of the CE loss with respect to the output of the softmax function.
We start with the CE loss formula:
L = -∑(y * log(p))
To compute the derivative, we'll use the chain rule. We'll first find the derivative of the loss with respect to the predicted probabilities p, and then find the derivative of p with respect to the output of the softmax function z.
Using the product rule, we can rewrite the derivative of the loss with respect to p as:
∂L/∂p = -y / p
Now, we need to find the derivative of p with respect to z. Recall that p is the softmax output, which is defined as:
p = exp(z) / ∑exp(z)
Using the quotient rule, we can find the derivative of p with respect to z as:
∂p/∂z = p * (1 - p)
However, this is not the final result we're looking for. We want to find the derivative of the loss with respect to z, not p. To do this, we'll use the chain rule again:
∂L/∂z = ∂L/∂p * ∂p/∂z
Substituting the expressions we derived earlier, we get:
∂L/∂z = (-y / p) * (p * (1 - p))
Simplifying this expression, we finally arrive at:
∂L/∂z = p - y
This is the derivative of the Cross-Entropy loss with respect to the output of the softmax function.
Note that this result assumes a one-hot encoded true label y. If your labels are not one-hot encoded, you may need to adjust the derivation accordingly.
